docs: basic tutorials (#2495)
sopel-irc/sopel: docs/source/tutorials/configurable.rst

Reviewer: Or `configuration-and-setup`? (More spitballing never hurt, right?)

Author: Hm... I like both! I'll say that we are already talking about a tutorial for plugins, so let's go with the "setup" route here.

==============================
Configuration and plugin setup
==============================

Maybe you :doc:`played with commands </tutorials/playing-command>` for your
plugin and now you want to make your plugin configurable. If you run an
instance of Sopel yourself, you probably had to open and edit its configuration
file.

Usually located in your home directory, under the ``.sopel/`` folder, the
configuration file is an INI file with sections defined by Sopel's core and by
plugins. In this tutorial, let's see how to declare and use a configuration
section dedicated to your plugin.

Declaring your configuration
============================

To declare a configuration section, you must first create a subclass of
:class:`~sopel.config.types.StaticSection`, and define attributes::

    from sopel.config import types

>     class MyFirstPlugin(types.StaticSection):

Reviewer: Decision point: Do we reinforce the core convention of naming the class `PluginNameSection` in this tutorial?

Even if we decide to promote a different conventional name format, it's probably wise to guide the user toward some meaningful suffix, like how most (built-in/stdlib) exceptions in Python end with `Error`.

Author: Good point! I'll try to use the same plugin name in the tutorial so it's easier to keep track of that. I believe having consistent naming will be enough for the tutorial.

        fruits = types.ListAttribute('fruits')

Telling Sopel about it
======================

Now, having a class in your plugin doesn't achieve much: you need to tell the
bot about it. The best place to do so is in the :func:`setup` function
hook of your plugin::

    def setup(bot):
        bot.settings.define_section('firstplugin', MyFirstPlugin)

This way, you tell Sopel that the section ``[firstplugin]`` is used by your
plugin, and to parse this section Sopel must use your class, i.e.
``MyFirstPlugin``.

Using your section
==================

In your configuration file, you can add the following lines:

.. code-block:: ini

    [firstplugin]
    fruits =
        banana
        apple
        peach
        strawberry

And Sopel will expose that for you through ``bot.settings``. For example, you
can write this command::

    import random

    @plugin.command('fruits')
    def fruits(bot, trigger):
        fruit = random.choice(bot.settings.firstplugin.fruits)
        bot.say(f'I want a {fruit}!')

And whenever someone triggers this command, the bot will say that it wants one
of the configured fruits. If you want to list 50 fruits or only 2 is up to you,

> and to the bot owners who will install your plugin.

Reviewer: Any interest in making a joke about the hard-coded `a`? Like "(or only fruits that don't start with a vowel)"? 😁

(Future tutorial including [`inflect`](https://pypi.org/project/inflect/)?)

Putting everything together
===========================

> We can regroup everything together in one file::

Reviewer: Further from the phrase shape used in the heading, so it doesn't sound as redundant.

```suggestion
We can combine all of this into one plugin file::
```

Yeah, nitpicks like this _are_ why I never get anything done at $work. Why do you ask?

    import random
    from sopel.config import types

    class MyFirstPlugin(types.StaticSection):
        """Declaration of your plugin's configuration."""
        fruits = types.ListAttribute('fruits')

    def setup(bot):
        """Telling the bot about the plugin's configuration."""
        bot.settings.define_section('firstplugin', MyFirstPlugin)

    @plugin.command('fruits')
    def fruits(bot, trigger):
        """Using the plugin's configuration in our command."""
        fruit = random.choice(bot.settings.firstplugin.fruits)
        bot.say(f'I want a {fruit}!')

As you can see, there are several steps when it comes to configuration. Sopel

> tries to make it as straightforward as possible for you to declare and to setup

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tries to make it as straightforward and flexible as possible for you to declare and to setup
```

Too much? (I know, it'll need a rewrap.)

your plugin configuration, and it offers various possibilities.

You can read more about :ref:`plugin configuration <plugin-anatomy-config>`,

> which includes a section about the configuration wizzard as well. You can also

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which includes a section about the configuration wizard as well. You can also
```

Author: Wizzzzzzzzzzard!

==============================
Configuration and plugin setup
==============================

Maybe you :doc:`played with commands </tutorials/playing-command>` for your
plugin and now you want to make your plugin configurable. If you run an
instance of Sopel yourself, you probably had to open and edit its configuration
file.

Usually located in your home directory, under the ``.sopel/`` folder, the
configuration file is an INI file with sections defined by Sopel's core and by
plugins. In this tutorial, let's see how to declare and use a configuration
section dedicated to your plugin.

Declaring your configuration
============================

> To declare a configuration section, you must first create a subclass of
> :class:`~sopel.config.types.StaticSection`, and define attributes::

Reviewer 2: I think it would help to clarify what `define attributes` means here and allude to the fact that there are two different kinds of attributes at play: Python class attributes and Sopel's attribute types for settings. I tried not to get carried away in my suggestion.

```suggestion
To declare a configuration section, you create a subclass of
:class:`~sopel.config.types.StaticSection` that defines a class attribute for
each setting that can be configured in that section. To declare a section with
one list setting named ``fruits``, you can do::

    from sopel.config import types

    class MyPluginSection(types.StaticSection):
        fruits = types.ListAttribute('fruits')

.. note::
    The first ``fruits`` above is the name of this field *on instances of this
    class*, and the second is the name of the section *in the configuration
    file*. It is common (but not required) to use the same name for both.
```

Author: This is too much details for a tutorial.

    from sopel.config import types

    class MyPluginSection(types.StaticSection):
        fruits = types.ListAttribute('fruits')

Telling Sopel about it
======================

Now, having a class in your plugin doesn't achieve much: you need to tell the
bot about it. The best place to do so is in the :func:`setup` function

> hook of your plugin::

Author: I'd replace "calling" (which is more accurate) by "using" which is more reader friendly.

Note: you can use this `:meth:~sopel.config.Config.define_section` (with the `~`) to make Sphinx display only the method's name and not the full path.

> bot about it. The best place to do so is in the :func:`setup` function
> hook of your plugin::

Author: ```suggestion
bot about it by using the :meth:`~sopel.config.Config.define_section` method.
The best place to do so is in the :func:`setup` function hook of your plugin::
```

    def setup(bot):
        bot.settings.define_section('myplugin', MyPluginSection)

This way, you tell Sopel that the ``[myplugin]`` section is used by your
plugin, and to parse this section Sopel must use your class, i.e.

> ``MyPluginSection``.

Author: This is way too much internal behavior explained for a tutorial.

Using your section
==================

> In your configuration file, you can add the following lines:

Reviewer 2: Slight reword to suggest more strongly that this new section means nothing to Sopel without the steps that came before.

```suggestion
Now that you have told Sopel about your custom section, you can add the
following lines in your configuration file:
```

.. code-block:: ini

    [myplugin]
    fruits =
        banana
        apple
        peach
        strawberry

> And Sopel will expose that for you through ``bot.settings``. For example, you
> can write this command::

Reviewer 2: Slight rewording, emphasize that the section is stored as an instance of the class and use its "full name" in this context (rather than referring to the entire configuration stored in `settings`).

```suggestion
And Sopel will store this section's options in ``bot.settings.myplugin`` using
an instance of the class defined earlier. These settings are now available for
your plugin to use! For example, you can write this command::
```

Author: Ditto, too much details. I'll use `bot.settings.myplugin` tho, that's better.

    import random

    @plugin.command('fruits')
    def fruits(bot, trigger):
        fruit = random.choice(bot.settings.myplugin.fruits)
        bot.say(f'I want a {fruit}!')

And whenever someone triggers this command, the bot will say that it wants one
of the configured fruits. If you want to list 50 fruits or only 2 is up to you,
and to the bot owners who will install your plugin.

Putting everything together
===========================

We can combine all of this into one plugin file, located at the same place as
before (``~/.sopel/plugins/myplugin.py``, assuming the default location)::

    import random
    from sopel.config import types

    class MyPluginSection(types.StaticSection):
        """Declaration of your plugin's configuration."""
        fruits = types.ListAttribute('fruits')

    def setup(bot):
        """Telling the bot about the plugin's configuration."""
        bot.settings.define_section('myplugin', MyPluginSection)

    @plugin.command('fruits')
    def fruits(bot, trigger):
        """Using the plugin's configuration in our command."""
        fruit = random.choice(bot.settings.myplugin.fruits)
        bot.say(f'I want a {fruit}!')

> As you can see, there are several steps when it comes to configuration. Sopel
> tries to make it as straightforward and flexible as possible for you to declare
> and to setup your plugin configuration, and it offers various possibilities.
> 

Reviewer 2: I think this paragraph can be dropped entirely, especially since we're about to refer more directly to the `various possibilities` by linking to more thorough documentation :grin: 

```suggestion
```

Author: No, it is important to remind the reader that there are multiple steps in the process. It is a warning that, hey, they **must** pay attention to all the requirements. The last bit about "offers various possibilities" could be dropped, reading it now it feels unnecessary.
